
Data Pre-Processing:

1. Terminologies:
    a. Corpus: Paragraph
    b. Documents - Sentences
    c. Vocab - Unique Words
    d. Words - All the words in the Corpus

2. Tokenization: Converts unstructured text into a structured form suitable for analysis, word embeddings, parsing, classification
Process of breaking a text into smaller units called tokens. These tokens can be:
Words (e.g., "I love NLP" → ["I", "love", "NLP"])
Subwords (e.g., "unhappiness" → ["un", "happi", "ness"]) - Used in models like BERT and GPT
Characters (e.g., "Hi" → ["H", "i"])
Sentences (e.g., "Hi there. How are you?" → ["Hi there.", "How are you?"])
    a. Convert paragraph to Sentences : from nltk.tokenize import sent_tokenize
    b. Convert sentence to words: from nltk.tokenize import word_tokenize, from nltk.tokenize import wordpunct_tokenize, from nltk.tokenize import TreebankWordTokenizer
    c. Determine unique words: set(filtered_words)
    d. Flow: Paragraph -> Words -> Convert all words to lower case and remove punctuations -> Remove stop words -> set(filtered_words) to get unique words

3. Stemming: Stemming is the process of reducing words to their root or base form (called the stem), by removing suffixes or prefixes. 
It helps in grouping different forms of a word so they can be analyzed as a single item.
    a. from nltk.stem import PorterStemmer
    b. from nltk.stem import LancasterStemmer - better than PorterStemmer 
    c. from nltk.stem import SnowballStemmer - better than LancasterStemmer (multiple languages), converts all tokens to lowercase
    d. from nltk.stem import RegexStemmer -> Words that matches the regex will be removed -> e.g: RegexStemmer('ing$'): eating -> eat
    d. Not always helpful as it may change the word while stemming: congratulations -> congratul. Cannot be used for real world applications

4. Lemmatization: Lemmatization is the process of reducing a word to its base or dictionary form, called a lemma, using linguistic knowledge 
(like parts of speech and morphology - structure and formation of words). Unlike stemming, lemmatization always returns a valid word without changing the meaning
    a. Import:
        from nltk.stem import WordNetLemmatizer
        from nltk.corpus import wordnet
        # Required downloads
        nltk.download('punkt')
        nltk.download('wordnet')
        nltk.download('omw-1.4')
        nltk.download('averaged_perceptron_tagger')
    b. POS tag (position tag):
        1. Noun - n
        2. Verb - v
        3. Adjective - a
        4. Adverb - r
    c. Better than Stemming but takes more time than Stemming

5. Stop Words: Stop words are the most common words in a language that often carry little useful information in text analysis. 
Examples include: English: the, is, in, and, an, of, to, was, etc. They are usually removed during preprocessing to focus on more meaningful words
    a. from nltk.corpus import stopwords
    b. # Download stopword list (only once)
        nltk.download('stopwords')
        nltk.download('punkt')
    c. # Get English stop words -> stop_words = set(stopwords.words('english'))
    d. # Remove stop words -> filtered_tokens = [lemmatizer.lemmatize(word.lower(), pos='v) for word in tokens if word.lower() not in stop_words]

6. Part of Speech Tagging: Part of Speech Tagging is the process of assigning a grammatical category (POS tag) to each word in a sentence, such as:
Noun (NN) — person, place, thing
Verb (VB) — action or state
Adjective (JJ) — describes a noun
Adverb (RB) — modifies a verb, adjective, or another adverb
Pronoun (PRP), Preposition (IN), Conjunction (CC), etc
    a. Libraries to download:
        1. nltk.download('punkt')
        2. nltk.download('averaged_perceptron_tagger')

7. Named Entity Recognition: Named Entity Recognition (NER) is the process of identifying and classifying named entities in text into predefined categories such as:
Person names — “Barack Obama”
Locations — “New York”, “India”
Organizations — “Google”, “UNICEF”
Dates & times — “July 4th”, “2 PM”
Monetary values — “$500”
Products, events, works of art, etc
    a. Libraries to download:
        1. nltk.download('punkt')
        2. nltk.download('averaged_perceptron_tagger')
        3. nltk.download('maxent_ne_chunker')
        4. nltk.download('words')


Flow of data-preprocessing before converting the texts into vectors:
Tokenization -> lowercase -> Regular Expression -> Stemming/ Lemmatization -> stopword -> convert text to Vector


Techniques to convert text to vectors:
1. One Hot encoding:
    a. Determine unique vocabulary
    b. The dimension of each vector = count of unique words
    c. Assign an index to each word.
    d. For each word, create a vector: All values are 0, except for 1 at the index of that word
    e. There will be vector in binary for each token/ word 
    f. For a particular sentence, we will get a matrix of size no of (No of words in that sentence x Total no of unique words)
    g. Limitations:
        1. Creates sparse matrix - Includes a lot of 1s and 0s -> Leads to over-fitting
        2. Missing Fixed size vectors - Depends on words in each sentence
        3. Does not capture semantic meaning - Semantic meaning: Understanding what the text is actually saying, not just recognizing the words
        4. Out of vocabulary (OOV) - If we get a new word in the test data set which is not present in the vocabulary, we won't be able to generate the accurate vectors

2. Bag of Words: Types: Binary BOW and BOW 
    a. Convert all words to lower case - Remove stop words
    b. Determine vocabulary
    c. Create a table in descending order for each word and its frequency in the corpus
    d. Select only top 10 words/ features
    e. The vectors are created for entire sentence
    g. The size of each vector will be constant: Matrix - No of sentences in the corpus x No of unique words in the vocabulary (first column with highest frequency)
    h. Limitation:
        1. Creates sparse matrix - Includes a lot of 1s and 0s -> Leads to over-fitting
        2. Does not capture semantic meaning - Semantic meaning: Understanding what the text is actually saying, not just recognizing the words
        3. Out of vocabulary (OOV) - If we get a new word in the test data set which is not present in the vocabulary, we won't be able to generate the accurate vectors 

3. N-Grams:
    a. 